---
layout: post
title:  "Systems"
categories: Health
image: Systems.jpg
---

>Those who mean to replace natural, traditional foods with modern-day food-like products in the name of health are championing the position that nature doesn't know best; a corporation does. This is an extraordinary claim requiring extraordinary evidence - a burden they have failed to meet.
Dr. Catherine Shanahan

The current state of health is abysmal. Look around you as well as within for all the evidence you need. Let's take a moment to think through this problem from a system engineer's perspective.

You are tasked to determine the root cause of failure for a particular system. It was humming along beautifully for a long time, then major changes were made, and it began failing dramatically. Any competent problem solver or engineer, when given this scenario, would first direct their attention to the "major changes" that the system underwent. It makes very little sense to claim that the conditions of the system while it was working well are to blame for the current problems. But, this is precisely what we have been told about health.

For millennia, humans were in a state of divine union with nature, taking full advantage of its health giving properties. Their skeletons, analyzed today, put ours to shame in terms of development and strength. The few remaining indigenous people still alive today prove, without a doubt, the vitality producing effects of a natural diet. The Agricultural Revolution did have a negative effect on the health of humans, but not enough to put our very existence in danger. At the turn of the 20th Century though, foods began to be invented that drastically altered the course of our health. They are producing an existential problem that must be addressed, especially considering our continually increasing infertility rates.

In the coming posts, we will examine these "major changes" in detail. Our body is a system which requires certain inputs to operate properly. These processed foods were developed without regard to this fundamental fact. It will become apparent that it's actually modern foods causing modern health problems, not natural foods.